# Simple Markov chains

This assignment is intended to deepen your understanding of first-order
Markov chains and of relative entropy. I will provide you with a data
set consisting of many protein sequences in a FASTA file (see
[FAST/FASTQ assignment](https://github.com/lebailly/BME205/tree/master/HW2)). You will build stochastic models
of these sequences as zero-order and first-order Markov chains, and
measure the information gain of the first-order model over the
zero-order model.

I have provided two FASTA files:
[Python2\_f10\_1.seqs](markov_files/Python2_f10_1.seqs) and
[Python2\_f10\_2.seqs](markov_files/Python2_f10_2.seqs) for training and
testing the models. You will do 2-fold cross-validation (training on
each of the sets and testing on the other). These can be accessed on
School of Engineering machines directly from the directory
/soe/karplus/.html/bme205/f13/markov\_files/ so that you don't need to
make your own copies.

The combined set was derived from [Dunbrack's culledpdb
list](http://dunbrack.fccc.edu/PISCES.php) of X-ray structures with
resolution 1.6 Angstroms or better and R-factor \<= 0.25, reduced so
that no two sequences had more than 90% identity. I used only those
sequences that were in our t06 template library, which primarily means
that short sequences were removed. I randomly split the list of chain
ids into two partitions. For full details on how the set was created,
see the [Makefile](https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~karplus/bme205/f13/markov_files/Makefile).

We will be modeling the sequences including a special "stop" character
at the end of the sequences. This means that the Markov chains will have
probabilities that add to one over all strings that end with the stop
character, rather than over strings of a fixed length. For simplicity,
we'll be using different non-sequence characters to indicate the start
of a sequence (\^) and end of the sequence(\$). Note that the training
and test data files do not have these special charactersâ€”the alphabet is
amino acids (with a possibility of special wild cards 'X', 'B', and
'Z').

It might be a good idea in your code to have separate parameters for
start and stop characters, and to allow `start=None` to mean that k-mers
that start before the first character of the sequence are not counted
(similarly for `stop=None`.

The simplest model we discussed in class is the i.i.d. (independent,
identically distributed) model, or zero-order Markov model. It assumes
that each character of the string comes from the same *background*
distribution P\_0, and the probability of a string is just the product
of the probabilities of the letters of the string (including the final
"\$"). To estimate the background distribution, we need counts of all
the letters in the training set.

The next simplest model was a Markov chain, in which the probability of
each character depends only on the preceding character. To estimate the
conditional probabilities, we'll need the counts for all pairs of
letters in the training set, including initial pairs (like "\^M") and
ending pairs (like "K\$").

In general, for estimating a k-th order Markov chain, we need counts of
all (k+1)-mers in the training data.

* * * * *

### First program: count-kmers

Write a program called "count-kmers" that reads a FASTA file from stdin
and outputs a table of counts to stdout. The output should have two
tokens on each line: the k-mer followed by the count of that k-mer.
Initial and final k-mers should be symmetrically included, that is, if
the sequence is ABDEF and you are counting 3-mers, the counts should be

    ^^A 1
    ^AB 1
    ABD 1
    BDE 1
    DEF 1
    EF$ 1
    F$$ 1

Note: case should be ignored in the input sequence, so that "abDE",
"ABDE", and "abde" are all counted as the same 4-mer.

Hint: there are two different approaches to counting k-mers. In one, you
process the file a line at a time (to distinguish id lines), then
process the sequence lines a character at a time, using something like
`kmer = kmer[0:-1]+letter`. In the other approach, you can define a
generator function in Python to read a fasta file one sequence at a
time, then extract the kmers from the sequence with something like

        for (fasta_id,comment,seq) in read_sequence(genome):
        for start in range(len(seq)-k):
                counts[seq[start:start+k]] += 1

Both approaches are useful. The first one does not require large amounts
of RAM when you get very long sequences (like whole plant chromosomes),
and the second one can be used for other FASTA reading, where the
sequences need to be processed individually in more complex ways. Given
that you have already written a FASTA parser, I expect that most
students will choose to use it.

The "count-kmers" program must accept two options:

 `--order` (or -o) 
:   that gives the order of the model (hence `--order==0` should count
    1-mers) and
`--alphabet` (or -a) 
:   which specifies which letters of the sequence are to be used (for
    example, to count only standard amino acids, use
    `--alphabet ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY`). All characters in sequences that
    are not in the alphabet should be ignored. Note: you may want to use
    the "set" type to represent the alphabet internally. The alphabet
    should default to ASCII letters if not specified.

The command-line option parsing should be done with the "argparse"
module. The actual counting of k-mers should be done by a function you
define in a separate module (Markov.py or markov.py). The counts are
most easily kept and returned in a "collections.Counter" object, which
provides a very convenient way to do all sorts of counting.

If the k-mer counting function is passed sys.stdin as an argument, then
you can easily reuse it on other files. Furthermore, if you use
`for line in input_stream:` to read the input, then you can do testing
by passing in a list of lines:

    >>> dummy_in= '>seq1\\nABCDEF\\n>seq2\\nAC\\nde\\nFG\\n>seq3\\n'
    >>> count=get_counts(dummy_in.splitlines(True), 2, alphabet="ABCDEFGHIJK", start='^', stop='$')

Here is an example of what you should get when your run your program:

    count-kmers -o0 --alphabet=ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY < /soe/karplus/.html/bme205/f13/markov_files/Python2_f10_1.seqs 

\$ 2517 A 48441 C 7676 D 34223 E 36355 F 22567 G 45576 H 15831 I 31216 K
31943 L 49311 M 13032 N 25218 P 27188 Q 21205 R 27749 S 35801 T 31893 V
39892 W 8481 Y 20362

Similarly, when you run

    count-kmers -o1 --alphabet=ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY < /soe/karplus/.html/bme205/f13/markov_files/tiny.seqs 

you should get

    A$ 1
    AC 4
    AG 1
    AM 7
    CA 3
    CD 4
    DE 4
    EF 4
    FA 3
    FG 1
    GG 9
    GH 1
    GM 1
    HI 1
    IK 1
    K$ 1
    M$ 1
    MA 6
    MC 3
    MM 2
    MW 1
    WM 1
    WW 3
    ^A 1
    ^M 2

For symmetry, report as many stop characters as you report start
characters (this makes it easier to make "reverse Markov" models that
model the sequences in reverse order).

    count-kmers -o2 --alphabet=ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY < /soe/karplus/.html/bme205/f13/markov_files/tiny.seqs 

you should get

    A$$ 1
    ACD 4
    AGH 1
    AM$ 1
    AMA 4
    AMC 1
    AMM 1
    CAM 3
    CDE 4
    DEF 4
    EFA 3
    EFG 1
    FAC 2
    FAG 1
    FGG 1
    GGG 8
    GGM 1
    GHI 1
    GMA 1
    HIK 1
    IK$ 1
    K$$ 1
    M$$ 1
    MA$ 1
    MAC 1
    MAM 4
    MCA 3
    MMM 1
    MMW 1
    MWW 1
    WMC 1
    WWM 1
    WWW 2
    ^AC 1
    ^MA 1
    ^MC 1
    ^^A 1
    ^^M 2

Note: the output should be sorted in alphabetical order, with a single
space separator, so that I can check I/O behavior using the "diff"
program.

Optional bonus points:

-   Use the doctest module to do unit testing for the functions in your
    markov module.
-   Add options `--start` and `--stop` to change the start and stop
    characters.
-   Add an option to sort the k-mers in reverse order of counts for the
    output file.
-   Check that the alphabet has only printable, non-whitespace
    characters in it. Raise an exception if there are problems.
-   Check that the stop and start characters are not part of the
    alphabet, and raise an exception if they are.

* * * * *

### Second program: coding-cost

Write a program that reads in a table of k-mer counts (in the same
format as you output them) from stdin and FASTA-formatted sequences from
a file (passed as a required argument to the program), and computes the
total encoding cost in bits for the sequences. The encoding cost of a
character x using model M is -log\_2 P\_M(x), and the encoding cost of a
sequence is the sum of the costs for the characters (note: this is
equivalent to taking -log\_2 of the product of the probabilities).

Report not only the total encoding cost for the file, but the average
cost per sequence and per character. So that everyone gets the same
numbers, for the per-character costs the numerator is the total cost,
which includes encoding exactly one stop character at the end (for any
order), and the denominator is the number of characters *not* counting
the stop character. I'm not defending this as necessarily the best
numerator and denominator to use for average cost/character, but it is
the choice I used in generating the "right" answers.

Note that to do the computation, you need to convert the counts into
probabilities. The simplest approach is to normalize the counts to sum
to 1 over each "condition". Note that `kmer[0:-1]` is the "condition"
for a given k-mer. You might think that because the FASTA training file
will be large, you will not need to worry about pseudocounts, but even
by order 2, there are 3-mers that have zero counts, so the
maximum-likelihood estimate of their probability is 0 and the encoding
cost is infinite (resulting in a "ValueError: math domain error" from
python if you actually try to compute it).

The next simplest approach is to add a pseudocount to every count
(including the zero counts for a context, so if you have seen "WWA",
"WWC", ... but not "WWH" or "WWI", you have the context "WW" and will
need to add a pseudocount for every "WWx" where x ranges over your
alphabet. I recommend adding a function to your markov module that
produces a conditional probability dict from a count dict or Counter
(without changing count), so that you can easily modify the way you
handle the probability estimation. The default pseudocount should be 1.0
for each cell.

The simple approach of making sure that pseudocounts have been used for
letters in every observed context will work fine up to about order 2,
but for higher order Markov chains, you might run into k-mers for which
even the k-1-mer that is the context has never been seen in the training
set. (For example, Python2\_f10\_2.seqs has a sequence starting with
CYC, producing 4-mer \^CYC , but the context \^CY never occurs in
Python2\_f10\_1.seqs.)

You can fix this problem by making sure that the log-prob table has keys
for all k-mers over the alphabet.

One tricky point in the log-prob table: We know that once we get to the
end of a sequence and have seen the final "\$", then all subsequent
letters must be "\$", so we do not want P("A\$A") to be non-zero, even
if we have seen counts for "A\$\$".

Hint: for this assignment, since we are not looking at the encoding cost
individually for each sequence, but only the total encoding cost, you
can summarize the fasta file with the same sort of dictionary of counts
that was used for count-kmers. You can determine the size of k-mer you
need to count by looking at the size of the keys you read in for the
model.

Run coding\_cost on both sets of sequences using both order 0 and order
1 models. Get the coding costs both for the training set and for the
test set. For comparison, my code with an autodetected alphabet got

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Train
  Test
  order 0 bits/char
  order1 bits/char
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_1
  Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_2
  4.22893            4.22897            4.22678            4.22686
  4.20759            4.20872            4.20476            4.20601
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The table with the constrained alphabet ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY is

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Train
  Test
  order 0 bits/char
  order1 bits/char
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_1
  Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_1    Python2\_f10\_2    Python2\_f10\_2
  4.22796            4.22803            4.22590            4.22597
  4.20691            4.20802            4.20424            4.20536
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note that a simple uniform model over 20 characters would take 4.32193
bits/char, and over a 21-letter alphabet (including stop) would take
4.39232 bits/char.

Optional bonus points:

Autodetect the alphabet. That is, set the alphabet to any letters, or
maybe even any non-whitespace, characters that occur in the sequences.

For each of the conditional probability distributions for the possible
prior states (for first-order, this would be 21 states: start and 20
amino acids), compute the relative entropy between it and the background
distribution. Where are the biggest information gains coming from?

Test the "reversibility" of an alphabet, by determining the coding cost
for reversed sequences using the Markov chain. Note that since we
counted off-the-end characters symmetrically at the beginning and end,
we can simply create a new reverse\_count object which has the same
values but with each key reversed (and stop/start codes appropriately
swapped).

Have the program automatically run tests of different values of the
pseudocount, to find out what value works best. This can be as simple as

        for pseudocount in [1e-10, 0.01, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 100]:  

or as sophisticated as you want to make it.

Try a more sophisticated regularizer than pseudocounts. For example, you
could use the probabilities from a smaller context. One method I think
is cool, but have not yet implemented, is to have the pseudocounts for a
order k+1 model be alpha\*probabilities from an order k model,
recursively down to pseudocounts of alpha/num\_letters for an order 0
model.

Look at the encoding costs for sequences over other alphabets: I have
provided a couple of other sets, one using the str2 secondary-structure
alphabet, and one using the near-backbone-11 burial alphabet:
[Python2\_f10\_1.str2s](markov_files/Python2_f10_1.str2s)
[Python2\_f10\_2.str2s](markov_files/Python2_f10_2.str2s)
[Python2\_f10\_1.near-backbone-11s](markov_files/Python2_f10_1.near-backbone-11s)
[Python2\_f10\_2.near-backbone-11s](markov_files/Python2_f10_2.near-backbone-11s)
The str2 alphabet includes the following "normal" characters:
ABCEGHMPQSTYZ. The character X is also possible (as a wildcard) and I
(as an alias for H). The near-backbone-11 burial alphabet has letters
ABCDEFGHIJK.

To get even fancier with alphabets, allow the user to specify the
alphabet by name, and look it up in the
[/projects/compbio/lib/alphabet/](http://compbio.soe.ucsc.edu/alphabets)
files we have defined for our various other programs. The ExtAA alphabet
gives the definition of the amino acids. Note the specification of
wildcards. Another alphabet we use a lot is the EHL2 alphabet, in
DSSP.alphabet---note its use of aliases to collapse several different
letters in a sequence into the same equivalence class.

Think about adding options to handle letters that are not the 20
standard amino acids (wildcards B,Z, and X, and spaces "." and "-"). The
basic assignment calls for you to ignore any letters or punctuation not
in the alphabet you specify.

-   X is a code for any amino acid
-   B is a code for aspartic acid or asparagine (D or N)
-   Z is a code for glutamic acid or glutamine (E or Q)
-   I have heard that mass spectrometry people sometimes use J for
    isoleucine or leucine (I or L), since they have identical mass, but
    I've not seen this in files I've used.

The B and Z codes occur mainly in protein sequences that have been
determined by old-fashioned chemical methods, not from translating DNA
sequences.

There are several ways to handle wildcards and non-standard amino acid
letters:

1.  treat them the same as spaces, tabs, ".", and "-". That is ignore
    them completely on input. This will make one erroneous transition:
    ABF would look like AF. This is the default behavior that your
    programs are expected to provide.
2.  Arbitrarily pick one of the possible amino acids (maybe replace B by
    D and Z by E).
3.  Treat the character as a gap in the sequenceâ€”handle the subsequences
    on each side as different sequences. There are two variants of
    thisâ€”one which starts a new sequence after the B like any other
    sequence (so ABF would have a start-\>F transition) and one that
    doesn't add the start-\>F transition. Note that adding a start-\>F
    transition may throw off probabilities for what the first residue of
    a sequence really is.

There are undoubtedly other methods also. What ever you do **document**
your choices.

To turn in
----------

I want copies of your programs on paper, but I don't want all the output
from every run of the programs! Instead, write a short summary
describing the results of the tests, giving the average encoding costs
for each set of sequences for each model. Try to write your summary as
if you were describing the method and the results in a journal paper
that has a page limit: you want to describe the data sets and methods
completely but concisely. If you do it well, the presentation should
take less than a page.

Turn in your summary page with the program stapled after it. (Avoid
paper clipsâ€”they have a tendency to either come off or to pick up other
people's papers.)

I also want a directory name for a directory on the School of
Engineering machines that I can read that contains all the programs and
writeup for this assignment. Make sure that the directory and all files
in it are publicly readable, and that all directories on the path to it
are publicly executable, or I won't be able to access the files.

Hints
-----

-   The programs specified here do not need to really read fasta as
    sequences. The id lines can be mostly ignored and the sequences
    processed a character at a time (you do need to know when to start a
    new sequence). But you can use your FASTA parser if you want to.
-   Uppercase your lines from the fasta input, since you want to ignore
    case.
-   Because real sequences may have length 0, be sure your program can
    handle the empty sequence properly.
-   The reversal of a string is standard python function, but it doesn't
    return a string object, but a "reversed" object, which appears to be
    derived from lists rather than strings. To get a reversed string for
    kmer, use

            "".join(reversed(kmer))

-   An observation from previous years: A lot of students managed to
    make their programs more complex to write and harder to use by
    insisting on file I/O instead of using stdin and stdout. The
    assignment **requires** that you use stdin and stdout. Also, error
    messages should be printed to stderr (to avoid corrupting the main
    output in stdout).
-   Remember that Markov chains are *conditional* probabilities P(x\_i=s
    | x\_{i-1}=t), not joint probabilities.
-   Break code into paragraphs, separated by blank lines, and start each
    paragraph with a comment as a topic sentence for the paragraph.
-   Don't read all the data before processing any. If you want to make a
    fasta-reading module, make sure its interface returns one sequence
    at a time, using the `yield` statement in Python to make a
    generator.
-   A sequence may span many lines. Make sure that you don't start a new
    sequence with each new line. Sequences only start after an ID line,
    which starts with "\>".
-   Don't have a logarithm computation in the inner loop. Convert your
    counts into costs (negative log probabilities) before running
    through the test set.
-   Make sure that your function definitions all have docstrings.

* * * * *

### Things learned for next year

Students were very poor at following I/O specs this yearâ€”many did not
read from stdin as required, and many got the program names wrong. I
also allowed too much variability: some students required `--alphabet`;
some did not allow it. some students even required `--order` on
coding-cost, where it should be trivially deduced from the input.

I'll probably have to provide more explicit examples of the command
lines I'll run, since students seem incapable of reading the specs.

I failed to specify that fasta files should be positional arguments for
coding-cost, so many required a `--in` or`--fasta` argument.